# Configuring an Encrypted Index

Cyborg Vector Search offers three index types, all of which offer varying characteristics:

|  Index Type  |  Speed  | Recall | Index Size |
| :-----: | :-----: | :----: | :--------: |
| [`IVF`](#ivf-index-type) | Fastest | Lowest |  Smallest  |
| [`IVFFlat`](#ivfflat-index-type) | Fast | Highest |  Biggest  |
| [`IVFPQ`](#ivfpq-index-type) | Fast | High |  Medium  |

Generally-speaking, we recommend that you start with `IVFFlat`, which provides the highest recall (accuracy) with high indexing and retrieval speeds. For most use-cases, this index type will scale well. If minimizing index size is important, `IVFPQ` takes `IVFFlat` and applies Product-Quantization (PQ, a form of lossy compression) to the vector embeddings which can greatly reduce index size.

## `IVF` Index Type

The `IVF` index type (Inverted File Index) is the simplest offered by Cyborg Vector Search. It takes a single parameter, `n_lists`, which defines the number of lists, or clusters, into which the index is segmented. In other words, vectors that are close together will be clustered together into a single list. At retrieval time, vectors in the clusters closest to the query vector will be returned. This yields a very fast, but rather inaccurate, search.

We recommend `IVF` indexes for applications which require high-speed, low-latency search with low recall requirements (or where `top_k` is rather large, i.e. >500).

To create an `IVF` index, you can use its configuration constructor:

```python
import cyborg_vector_search_py as cvs

# Set index parameters
dimension = 128  # Adjust according to your dataset (dimensionality)
n_lists = 4096

# Create the IVF index config
index_config = cvs.IndexIVF(dimension, n_lists)

# Create the index
index_name = "test_index"
index_key = bytes([0] * 32) # Set your private key here
index = client.create_index(index_name=index_name, index_key=index_key, index_config=index_config)
```

`n_lists` is the number of clusters into which each vector in the index can be categorized. Typically, the higher the value, the higher the recall (but also the slower the indexing process). As a good rule of thumbs, `n_lists` should be:

- A base-2 number (e.g., `2,048`, `4,096`). Not a requirement, but yields performance optimizations.
- Each cluster should have between `100` - `10,000` vectors; so `n_lists` should be roughly between `1/100` - `1/10,000` of the total number of items which will be indexed.

For implementation details of the `IVF` index type, review our API docs [here](../../reference/python/py-api.md#indexivf) (or for C++, [here](../../reference/cpp/cpp-api.md#indexivf)).

## `IVFFlat` Index Type

The `IVFFlat` index type improves `IVF` significantly by storing encrypted vector embeddings in the index. In addition to selecting the closest clusters for a query vector, the exact distance can be computed between each candidate vector and the query, yielding very high recall rates (up to >99%). This comes at the cost of index size and some search speed.

We recommend `IVFFlat` indexes for most applications, as it provides the highest recall rates, and it's possible to mitigate index size constraints later via `IVFPQ`.

To create an `IVFFlat` index, you can use its configuration constructor:

```python
# Set index parameters
dimension = 128  # Adjust according to your dataset (dimensionality)
n_lists = 4096

# Create the IVF index config
index_config = cvs.IndexIVFFlat(dimension, n_lists)

# Create the index
index_name = "test_index"
index_key = bytes([0] * 32) # Set your private key here
index = client.create_index(index_name=index_name, index_key=index_key, index_config=index_config)
```

`n_lists` is the number of clusters into which each vector in the index can be categorized. Typically, the higher the value, the higher the recall (but also the slower the indexing process). As a good rule of thumbs, `n_lists` should be:

- A base-2 number (e.g., `2,048`, `4,096`). Not a requirement, but yields performance optimizations.
- Each cluster should have between `100` - `10,000` vectors; so `n_lists` should be roughly between `1/100` - `1/10,000` of the total number of items which will be indexed.

For implementation details of the `IVFFlat` index type, review our API docs [here](../../reference/python/py-api.md#indexivfflat) (or for C++, [here](../../reference/cpp/cpp-api.md#indexivfflat)).

## `IVFPQ` Index Type

The `IVFPQ` index type builds upon `IVFFlat` by applying Product Quantization (PQ) - a form of lossy compression - to reduce the index size. When applied correctly, `IVFPQ` indexes can maintain high recall (>95%) while reducing index size significantly (2-4x).

We recommend `IVFPQ` indexes for mature applications, where the dataset and query distributions are well-established. This is because `IVFPQ` requires the most tuning to yield an ideal balance between recall and index size. It is possible to go from `IVFFlat` to `IVFPQ` on the same index, but not vice-versa.

To create an `IVFPQ` index, you can use its configuration constructor:

```python
# Set index parameters
dimension = 128  # Adjust according to your dataset (dimensionality)
n_lists = 4096
pq_dim = 32 # Dimension must be divisible by pq_dim
pq_bits = 8 # Number of bits for each pq dimension

# Create the IVF index config
index_config = cvs.IndexIVFPQ(dimension, n_lists, pq_dim, pq_bits)

# Create the index
index_name = "test_index"
index_key = bytes([0] * 32) # Set your private key here
index = client.create_index(index_name=index_name, index_key=index_key, index_config=index_config)
```

`n_lists` is the number of clusters into which each vector in the index can be categorized. Typically, the higher the value, the higher the recall (but also the slower the indexing process). As a good rule of thumbs, `n_lists` should be:

- A base-2 number (e.g., `2,048`, `4,096`). Not a requirement, but yields performance optimizations.
- Each cluster should have between `100` - `10,000` vectors; so `n_lists` should be roughly between `1/100` - `1/10,000` of the total number of items which will be indexed.

`pq_dim` is the number of dimensionality for each vector after product-quantization. It must be between `1` and `dimension`, and `dimension` must be cleanly divisible by `pq_dim`. Lower `pq_dim` will yield smaller index sizes but lower recall.

`pq_bits` is the number of bits that will be used to represent each dimension of the product-quantized vector embeddings. It must be between `1` and `16`, with lower values yielding smaller index sizes but lower recall.

For implementation details of the `IVFPQ` index type, review our API docs [here](../../reference/python/py-api.md#indexivfpq) (or for C++, [here](../../reference/cpp/cpp-api.md#indexivfpq)).

## Customizing Distance Metrics

By default, Cyborg Vector Search uses `euclidean` distance as its metric for all index types. You can override this default by providing a `distance_metric` parameter to any of the index constructors. For example:

```python
# Existing setup
index_config = cvs.IndexIVFFlat(dimension, n_lists, distance_metric='cosine')
```

The currently supported distance metrics are:

- `"cosine"`: Cosine similarity.
- `"euclidean"`: Euclidean distance.
- `"squared_euclidean"`: Squared Euclidean distance.

## Further Reading

Next steps:

- [Adding Data to an Encrypted Index >](../3.data-operations/3.0.upsert.md)

API details:

- [Python API: Index Types >](../../reference/python/py-api.md#indexconfig)
- [C++ API: Index Types >](../../reference/cpp/cpp-api.md#indexconfig)